docs/reference/cli/validate.md, before:

# Validate Command Reference

## Overview

The `validate` command performs dynamic validation of FlowSpec against execution traces, ensuring that the actual service interactions match the declared choreography specifications.

## Usage

```bash
choreoatlas validate [options]
```

## Options

| Option | Type | Default | Description |
|--------|------|---------|-------------|
| `--flow` | string | `.flowspec.yaml` | Path to FlowSpec file |
| `--trace` | string | *(required)* | Path to trace.json file |
| `--semantic` | bool | `true` | Enable semantic validation (CEL) |
| `--causality` | string | `temporal` | Causality check mode: `strict`, `temporal`, or `off` |
| `--baseline` | string | - | Path to baseline file for comparison |
| `--threshold-steps` | float | `0.9` | Step coverage threshold (0.0-1.0) |
| `--threshold-conds` | float | `0.95` | Condition pass rate threshold (0.0-1.0) |
| `--skip-as-fail` | bool | `false` | Treat SKIP conditions as FAIL |
| `--report-format` | string | - | Report format: `json`, `junit`, or `html` |
| `--report-out` | string | - | Path for report output |

## Exit Codes

The validate command uses standardized exit codes for CI/CD integration:

| Code | Constant | Description |
|------|----------|-------------|
| `0` | `OK` | All validations and gates passed |
| `1` | `CLIError` | General CLI errors (invalid arguments, etc.) |
| `2` | `InputError` | File not found or parsing errors |
| `3` | `ValidationFailed` | Validation failures (spec vs trace mismatch) |
| `4` | `GateFailed` | Gate policy violations (thresholds not met) |

## Examples

### Basic Validation

```bash
choreoatlas validate \
  --flow order-flow.flowspec.yaml \
  --trace traces/order-123.json
```

### With Gate Thresholds

```bash
choreoatlas validate \
  --flow order-flow.flowspec.yaml \
  --trace traces/order-123.json \
  --threshold-steps 0.95 \
  --threshold-conds 0.98
```

### Generate JUnit Report for CI

```bash
choreoatlas validate \
  --flow order-flow.flowspec.yaml \
  --trace traces/order-123.json \
  --report-format junit \
  --report-out test-results.xml
```

### Compare with Baseline

```bash
choreoatlas validate \
  --flow order-flow.flowspec.yaml \
  --trace traces/current.json \
  --baseline baseline.json
```

## Validation Process

1. **Lint Check**: Static validation of FlowSpec consistency
2. **Trace Loading**: Parse and validate trace.json format
3. **Dynamic Validation**: Match trace spans against FlowSpec steps
4. **Semantic Validation**: Evaluate CEL conditions (if enabled)
5. **Causality Check**: Verify temporal ordering (if enabled)
6. **Gate Evaluation**: Check coverage and pass rate thresholds
7. **Report Generation**: Output results in requested format

## See Also

- [README Exit Codes](../../../README.md#exit-codes)
- [FlowSpec Schema](../../flowspec/schema.md)
- [CI Integration Guide](../../ci/github-actions.md)

Commit message:

feat(validate): baseline-aware gates (relative) + report fields
- Fix baseline data passing to EvaluateGate (was always nil)
- Implement relative mode: compare delta percentages vs baseline
- Add baseline comparison display in gate output
- Implement --baseline-missing strategy (fail|treat-as-absolute)
- Update documentation with baseline fields and examples
- Support both absolute and relative threshold modes

When baseline is provided:
- Thresholds represent max allowed degradation
- Shows baseline → current with delta percentage
- Calculates relative change for both steps and conditions

Closes #6
Closes #7
Closes #8
Closes #9
Closes #10
Refs #26

docs/reference/cli/validate.md, after:

# Validate Command Reference

## Overview

The `validate` command performs dynamic validation of FlowSpec against execution traces, ensuring that the actual service interactions match the declared choreography specifications.

## Usage

```bash
choreoatlas validate [options]
```

## Options

| Option | Type | Default | Description |
|--------|------|---------|-------------|
| `--flow` | string | `.flowspec.yaml` | Path to FlowSpec file |
| `--trace` | string | *(required)* | Path to trace.json file |
| `--semantic` | bool | `true` | Enable semantic validation (CEL) |
| `--causality` | string | `temporal` | Causality check mode: `strict`, `temporal`, or `off` |
| `--baseline` | string | - | Path to baseline file for comparison |
| `--baseline-missing` | string | `fail` | Strategy when baseline file is missing: `fail` or `treat-as-absolute` |
| `--threshold-steps` | float | `0.9` | Step coverage threshold (0.0-1.0) |
| `--threshold-conds` | float | `0.95` | Condition pass rate threshold (0.0-1.0) |
| `--skip-as-fail` | bool | `false` | Treat SKIP conditions as FAIL |
| `--report-format` | string | - | Report format: `json`, `junit`, or `html` |
| `--report-out` | string | - | Path for report output |

## Exit Codes

The validate command uses standardized exit codes for CI/CD integration:

| Code | Constant | Description |
|------|----------|-------------|
| `0` | `OK` | All validations and gates passed |
| `1` | `CLIError` | General CLI errors (invalid arguments, etc.) |
| `2` | `InputError` | File not found or parsing errors |
| `3` | `ValidationFailed` | Validation failures (spec vs trace mismatch) |
| `4` | `GateFailed` | Gate policy violations (thresholds not met) |

## Examples

### Basic Validation

```bash
choreoatlas validate \
  --flow order-flow.flowspec.yaml \
  --trace traces/order-123.json
```

### With Gate Thresholds

```bash
choreoatlas validate \
  --flow order-flow.flowspec.yaml \
  --trace traces/order-123.json \
  --threshold-steps 0.95 \
  --threshold-conds 0.98
```

### Generate JUnit Report for CI

```bash
choreoatlas validate \
  --flow order-flow.flowspec.yaml \
  --trace traces/order-123.json \
  --report-format junit \
  --report-out test-results.xml
```

### Compare with Baseline

```bash
choreoatlas validate \
  --flow order-flow.flowspec.yaml \
  --trace traces/current.json \
  --baseline baseline.json
```

## Validation Process

1. **Lint Check**: Static validation of FlowSpec consistency
2. **Trace Loading**: Parse and validate trace.json format
3. **Dynamic Validation**: Match trace spans against FlowSpec steps
4. **Semantic Validation**: Evaluate CEL conditions (if enabled)
5. **Causality Check**: Verify temporal ordering (if enabled)
6. **Gate Evaluation**: Check coverage and pass rate thresholds
7. **Report Generation**: Output results in requested format

## See Also

- [README Exit Codes](../../../README.md#exit-codes)
- [FlowSpec Schema](../../flowspec/schema.md)
- [CI Integration Guide](../../ci/github-actions.md)
